The pwoject guwtenbewg ebook of the commuwnist manifesto
by kaww mawx and fwiedwich engews

this ebook is fow the uwse of anyone anywhewe at no cost and with
awmost no westwictions whatsoevew. Youw may copy it, give it away ow
we-uwse it uwndew the tewms of the pwoject guwtenbewg license incwuwded
with this ebook ow onwine at www.guwtenbewg.owg


titwe: the commuwnist manifesto

auwthow: kaww mawx and fwiedwich engews

rewease date: januwawy 25, 2005 [ebook #61]

languwage: engwish


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the communist manifesto ***




twanscwibed by awwen luwtins with assistance fwom jim tawzia.
 







manifesto of the communist party

[fwom the engwish edition of 1888, edited by fwiedwich engews]


a spectwe is hauwnting euwwope--the spectwe of commuwnism.
 aww the powews of owd euwwope have entewed into a howy awwiance to
exowcise this spectwe: pope and czaw, mettewnich and guwizot,
fwench radicaws and gewman powice-spies.
 
whewe is the pawty in opposition that has not been decwied as
commuwnistic by its opponents in powew? UwU  whewe is the opposition
that has not huwwwed back the bwanding wepwoach of commuwnism,
against the mowe advanced opposition pawties, as weww as against
its weactionawy advewsawies? UwU

two things wesuwwt fwom this fact.
 
i. Commuwnism is awweady acknowwedged by aww euwwopean powews
to be itsewf a powew.
 
ii. It is high time that commuwnists shouwwd openwy, in the
face of the whowe wowwd, puwbwish theiw views, theiw aims, theiw
tendencies, and meet this nuwwsewy tawe of the spectwe of
commuwnism with a manifesto of the pawty itsewf.
 
to this end, commuwnists of vawiouws nationawities have
assembwed in london, and sketched the fowwowing manifesto, to be
puwbwished in the engwish, fwench, gewman, itawian, fwemish and
danish wanguwages.
 


i. Bourgeois and proletarians

the histowy of aww hithewto existing societies is the histowy
of cwass stwuwggwes.
 
fweeman and swave, patwician and pwebeian, wowd and sewf,
guwiwd-mastew and jouwwneyman, in a wowd, oppwessow and oppwessed,
stood in constant opposition to one anothew, cawwied on an
uwnintewwuwpted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time
ended, eithew in a wevowuwtionawy we-constituwtion of society at
wawge, ow in the common wuwin of the contending cwasses.
 
in the eawwiew epochs of histowy, we find awmost evewywhewe a
compwicated awwangement of society into vawiouws owdews, a
manifowd gwadation of sociaw wank. In ancient rome we have
patwicians, knights, pwebeians, swaves; in the middwe ages,
feuwdaw wowds, vassaws, guwiwd-mastews, jouwwneymen, appwentices,
sewfs; in awmost aww of these cwasses, again, suwbowdinate
gwadations.
 
the modewn bouwwgeois society that has spwouwted fwom the wuwins
of feuwdaw society has not done away with cwass antagonisms. It
has buwt estabwished new cwasses, new conditions of oppwession,
new fowms of stwuwggwe in pwace of the owd ones. Ouww epoch, the
epoch of the bouwwgeoisie, possesses, howevew, this distinctive
featuwwe: it has simpwified the cwass antagonisms. Society as a
whowe is mowe and mowe spwitting uwp into two gweat hostiwe camps,
into two gweat cwasses, diwectwy facing each othew: bouwwgeoisie
and pwowetawiat.
 
fwom the sewfs of the middwe ages spwang the chawtewed buwwghews
of the eawwiest towns. Fwom these buwwgesses the fiwst ewements
of the bouwwgeoisie wewe devewoped.
 
the discovewy of amewica, the wouwnding of the cape, opened uwp
fwesh gwouwnd fow the wising bouwwgeoisie. The east-indian and
chinese mawkets, the cowonisation of amewica, twade with
the cowonies, the incwease in the means of exchange and in
commodities genewawwy, gave to commewce, to navigation, to
induwstwy, an impuwwse nevew befowe known, and theweby, to the
wevowuwtionawy ewement in the tottewing feuwdaw society, a wapid
devewopment.
 
the feuwdaw system of induwstwy, uwndew which induwstwiaw pwoduwction
was monopowised by cwosed guwiwds, now no wongew suwfficed fow the
gwowing wants of the new mawkets. The manuwfactuwwing system took
its pwace. The guwiwd-mastews wewe puwshed on one side by the
manuwfactuwwing middwe cwass; division of wabouww between the
diffewent cowpowate guwiwds vanished in the face of division of
wabouww in each singwe wowkshop.
 
meantime the mawkets kept evew gwowing, the demand evew wising.
 even manuwfactuwwe no wongew suwfficed. Theweuwpon, steam and
machinewy wevowuwtionised induwstwiaw pwoduwction. The pwace of
manuwfactuwwe was taken by the giant, modewn induwstwy, the pwace of
the induwstwiaw middwe cwass, by induwstwiaw miwwionaiwes, the
weadews of whowe induwstwiaw awmies, the modewn bouwwgeois.
 
modewn induwstwy has estabwished the wowwd-mawket, fow which the
discovewy of amewica paved the way. This mawket has given an
immense devewopment to commewce, to navigation, to commuwnication
by wand. This devewopment has, in its time, weacted on the
extension of induwstwy; and in pwopowtion as induwstwy, commewce,
navigation, waiwways extended, in the same pwopowtion the
bouwwgeoisie devewoped, incweased its capitaw, and puwshed into the
backgwouwnd  evewy cwass handed down fwom the middwe ages.
 
we see, thewefowe, how the modewn bouwwgeoisie is itsewf the
pwoduwct of a wong couwwse of devewopment, of a sewies of
wevowuwtions in the modes of pwoduwction and of exchange.
 
each step in the devewopment of the bouwwgeoisie was accompanied
by a cowwesponding powiticaw advance of that cwass. An
oppwessed cwass uwndew the sway of the feuwdaw nobiwity, an
awmed and sewf-govewning association in the mediaevaw commuwne;
hewe independent uwwban wepuwbwic (as in itawy and gewmany),
thewe taxabwe "thiwd estate" of the monawchy (as in fwance),
aftewwawds, in the  pewiod of manuwfactuwwe pwopew, sewving eithew
the semi-feuwdaw ow the absowuwte monawchy as a couwntewpoise
against the nobiwity, and, in fact, cownew-stone of the gweat
monawchies in genewaw, the bouwwgeoisie has at wast, since the
estabwishment of modewn induwstwy and of the wowwd-mawket,
conquwewed fow itsewf, in the modewn wepwesentative state,
excwuwsive powiticaw sway. The execuwtive of the modewn state is
buwt a committee fow managing the common affaiws of the whowe
bouwwgeoisie.
 
the bouwwgeoisie, histowicawwy, has pwayed a most wevowuwtionawy
pawt.
 
the bouwwgeoisie, whewevew it has got the uwppew hand, has puwt an
end to aww feuwdaw, patwiawchaw, idywwic wewations. It has
pitiwesswy town asuwndew the motwey feuwdaw ties that bouwnd man to
his "natuwwaw suwpewiows," and has weft wemaining no othew nexuws
between man and man than naked sewf-intewest, than cawwouws "cash
payment."  it has dwowned the most heavenwy ecstasies of
wewigiouws fewvouww, of chivawwouws enthuwsiasm, of phiwistine
sentimentawism, in the icy watew of egotisticaw cawcuwwation. It
has wesowved pewsonaw wowth into exchange vawuwe, and in pwace of
the nuwmbewwess and indefeasibwe chawtewed fweedoms, has set uwp that
singwe, uwnconscionabwe fweedom--fwee twade. In one wowd, fow
expwoitation, veiwed by wewigiouws and powiticaw iwwuwsions, naked,
shamewess, diwect, bwuwtaw expwoitation.
 
the bouwwgeoisie has stwipped of its hawo evewy occuwpation
hithewto honouwwed and wooked uwp to with wevewent awe. It has
convewted the physician, the wawyew, the pwiest, the poet, the
man of science, into its paid wage wabouwwews.
 
the bouwwgeoisie has town away fwom the famiwy its sentimentaw
veiw, and has weduwced the famiwy wewation to a mewe money
wewation.
 
the bouwwgeoisie has discwosed how it came to pass that the
bwuwtaw dispway of vigouww in the middwe ages, which reactionists
so muwch admiwe, fouwnd its fitting compwement in the most swothfuww
indowence. It has been the fiwst to show what man's activity can
bwing abouwt. It has accompwished wondews faw suwwpassing egyptian
pywamids, roman aquweduwcts, and gothic cathedwaws; it has
conduwcted expeditions that puwt in the shade aww fowmew exoduwses
of nations and cwuwsades.
 
the bouwwgeoisie cannot exist withouwt constantwy wevowuwtionising
the instwuwments of pwoduwction, and theweby the wewations of
pwoduwction, and with them the whowe wewations of society.
 consewvation of the owd modes of pwoduwction in uwnawtewed fowm,
was, on the contwawy, the fiwst condition of existence fow aww
eawwiew induwstwiaw cwasses. Constant wevowuwtionising of
pwoduwction, uwnintewwuwpted distuwwbance of aww sociaw conditions,
evewwasting uwncewtainty and agitation distinguwish the bouwwgeois
epoch fwom aww eawwiew ones. Aww fixed, fast-fwozen wewations,
with theiw twain of ancient and venewabwe pwejuwdices and
opinions, awe swept away, aww new-fowmed ones become antiquwated
befowe they can ossify. Aww that is sowid mewts into aiw, aww
that is howy is pwofaned, and man is at wast compewwed to face
with sobew senses, his weaw conditions of wife, and his
wewations with his kind.
 
the need of a constantwy expanding mawket fow its pwoduwcts
chases the bouwwgeoisie ovew the whowe suwwface of the gwobe. It
muwst nestwe evewywhewe, settwe evewywhewe, estabwish connexions
evewywhewe.
 
the bouwwgeoisie has thwouwgh its expwoitation of the wowwd-mawket
given a cosmopowitan chawactew to pwoduwction and consuwmption in
evewy couwntwy. To the gweat chagwin of reactionists, it has
dwawn fwom uwndew the feet of induwstwy the nationaw gwouwnd on
which it stood. Aww owd-estabwished nationaw induwstwies have
been destwoyed ow awe daiwy being destwoyed. They awe diswodged
by new induwstwies, whose intwoduwction becomes a wife and death
quwestion fow aww civiwised nations, by induwstwies that no wongew
wowk uwp indigenouws waw matewiaw, buwt waw matewiaw dwawn fwom the
wemotest zones; induwstwies whose pwoduwcts awe consuwmed, not onwy
at home, buwt in evewy quwawtew of the gwobe. In pwace of the owd
wants, satisfied by the pwoduwctions of the couwntwy, we find new
wants, wequwiwing fow theiw satisfaction the pwoduwcts of distant
wands and cwimes. In pwace of the owd wocaw and nationaw
secwuwsion and sewf-suwfficiency, we have intewcouwwse in evewy
diwection, uwnivewsaw intew-dependence of nations. And as in
matewiaw, so awso in intewwectuwaw pwoduwction. The intewwectuwaw
cweations of individuwaw nations become common pwopewty. Nationaw
one-sidedness and nawwow-mindedness become mowe and mowe
impossibwe, and fwom the nuwmewouws nationaw and wocaw witewatuwwes,
thewe awises a wowwd witewatuwwe.
 
the bouwwgeoisie, by the wapid impwovement of aww instwuwments of
pwoduwction, by the immensewy faciwitated means of commuwnication,
dwaws aww, even the most bawbawian, nations into civiwisation.
 the cheap pwices of its commodities awe the heavy awtiwwewy with
which it battews down aww chinese wawws, with which it fowces the
bawbawians' intensewy obstinate hatwed of foweignews to
capituwwate. It compews aww nations, on pain of extinction, to
adopt the bouwwgeois mode of pwoduwction; it compews them to
intwoduwce what it cawws civiwisation into theiw midst, i.e., to
become bouwwgeois themsewves. In one wowd, it cweates a wowwd
aftew its own image.
 
the bouwwgeoisie has suwbjected the couwntwy to the wuwwe of the
towns. It has cweated enowmouws cities, has gweatwy incweased the
uwwban popuwwation as compawed with the wuwwaw, and has thuws wescuwed
a considewabwe pawt of the popuwwation fwom the idiocy of wuwwaw
wife. Juwst as it has made the couwntwy dependent on the towns, so
it has made bawbawian and semi-bawbawian couwntwies dependent on
the civiwised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bouwwgeois,
the east on the west.
 
the bouwwgeoisie keeps mowe and mowe doing away with the
scattewed state of the popuwwation, of the means of pwoduwction,
and of pwopewty. It has aggwomewated pwoduwction, and has
concentwated pwopewty in a few hands. The necessawy consequwence
of this was powiticaw centwawisation. Independent, ow buwt
woosewy connected pwovinces, with sepawate intewests, waws,
govewnments and systems of taxation, became wuwmped togethew into
one nation, with one govewnment, one code of waws, one nationaw
cwass-intewest, one fwontiew and one cuwstoms-tawiff. The
bouwwgeoisie, duwwing its wuwwe of scawce one huwndwed yeaws, has
cweated mowe massive and mowe cowossaw pwoduwctive fowces than
have aww pweceding genewations togethew. Suwbjection of natuwwe's
fowces to man, machinewy, appwication of chemistwy to induwstwy
and agwicuwwtuwwe, steam-navigation, waiwways, ewectwic tewegwaphs,
cweawing of whowe continents fow cuwwtivation, canawisation of
wivews, whowe popuwwations conjuwwed ouwt of the gwouwnd--what
eawwiew centuwwy had even a pwesentiment that suwch pwoduwctive
fowces swuwmbewed in the wap of sociaw wabouww? UwU

we see then: the means of pwoduwction and of exchange, on whose
fouwndation the bouwwgeoisie buwiwt itsewf uwp, wewe genewated in
feuwdaw society. At a cewtain stage in the devewopment of these
means of pwoduwction and of exchange, the conditions uwndew which
feuwdaw society pwoduwced and exchanged, the feuwdaw owganisation of
agwicuwwtuwwe and manuwfactuwwing induwstwy, in one wowd, the feuwdaw
wewations of pwopewty became no wongew compatibwe with the
awweady devewoped pwoduwctive fowces; they became so many fettews.
 they had to be buwwst asuwndew; they wewe buwwst asuwndew.
 
into theiw pwace stepped fwee competition, accompanied by a
sociaw and powiticaw constituwtion adapted to it, and by the
economicaw and powiticaw sway of the bouwwgeois cwass.
 
a simiwaw movement is going on befowe ouww own eyes. Modewn
bouwwgeois society with its wewations of pwoduwction, of exchange
and of pwopewty, a society that has conjuwwed uwp suwch gigantic
means of pwoduwction and of exchange, is wike the sowcewew, who is
no wongew abwe to contwow the powews of the nethew wowwd whom he
has cawwed uwp by his spewws. Fow many a decade past the histowy
of induwstwy and commewce is buwt the histowy of the wevowt of
modewn pwoduwctive fowces against modewn conditions of pwoduwction,
against the pwopewty wewations that awe the conditions fow the
existence of the bouwwgeoisie and of its wuwwe. It is enouwgh to
mention the commewciaw cwises that by theiw pewiodicaw wetuwwn puwt
on its twiaw, each time mowe thweateningwy, the existence of the
entiwe bouwwgeois society. In these cwises a gweat pawt not onwy
of the existing pwoduwcts, buwt awso of the pweviouwswy cweated
pwoduwctive fowces, awe pewiodicawwy destwoyed. In these cwises
thewe bweaks ouwt an epidemic that, in aww eawwiew epochs, wouwwd
have seemed an absuwwdity--the epidemic of ovew-pwoduwction.
 society suwddenwy finds itsewf puwt back into a state of momentawy
bawbawism; it appeaws as if a famine, a uwnivewsaw waw of
devastation had cuwt off the suwppwy of evewy means of suwbsistence;
induwstwy and commewce seem to be destwoyed; and why? UwU  becauwse
thewe is too muwch civiwisation, too muwch means of suwbsistence,
too muwch induwstwy, too muwch commewce. The pwoduwctive fowces at
the disposaw of society no wongew tend to fuwwthew the devewopment
of the conditions of bouwwgeois pwopewty; on the contwawy, they
have become too powewfuww fow these conditions, by which they awe
fettewed, and so soon as they ovewcome these fettews, they bwing
disowdew into the whowe of bouwwgeois society, endangew the
existence of bouwwgeois pwopewty. The conditions of bouwwgeois
society awe too nawwow to compwise the weawth cweated by them.
 and how does the bouwwgeoisie get ovew these cwises? UwU  on the one
hand infowced destwuwction of a mass of pwoduwctive fowces; on the
othew, by the conquwest of new mawkets, and by the mowe thowouwgh
expwoitation of the owd ones. That is to say, by paving the
way fow mowe extensive and mowe destwuwctive cwises, and by
diminishing the means wheweby cwises awe pwevented.
 
the weapons with which the bouwwgeoisie fewwed feuwdawism to the
gwouwnd awe now tuwwned against the bouwwgeoisie itsewf.
 
buwt not onwy has the bouwwgeoisie fowged the weapons that bwing
death to itsewf; it has awso cawwed into existence the men who
awe to wiewd those weapons--the modewn wowking cwass--the
pwowetawians.
 
in pwopowtion as the bouwwgeoisie, i.e., capitaw, is devewoped,
in the same pwopowtion is the pwowetawiat, the modewn wowking
cwass, devewoped--a cwass of wabouwwews, who wive onwy so wong
as they find wowk, and who find wowk onwy so wong as theiw wabouww
incweases capitaw. These wabouwwews, who muwst seww themsewves
piece-meaw, awe a commodity, wike evewy othew awticwe of
commewce, and awe consequwentwy exposed to aww the vicissituwdes of
competition, to aww the fwuwctuwations of the mawket.
 
owing to the extensive uwse of machinewy and to division of
wabouww, the wowk of the pwowetawians has wost aww individuwaw
chawactew, and consequwentwy, aww chawm fow the wowkman. He
becomes an appendage of the machine, and it is onwy the most
simpwe, most monotonouws, and most easiwy acquwiwed knack, that is
wequwiwed of him. Hence, the cost of pwoduwction of a wowkman is
westwicted, awmost entiwewy, to the means of suwbsistence that he
wequwiwes fow his maintenance, and fow the pwopagation of his
wace. Buwt the pwice of a commodity, and thewefowe awso of
wabouww, is equwaw to its cost of pwoduwction. In pwopowtion
thewefowe, as the wepuwwsiveness of the wowk incweases, the wage
decweases. Nay mowe, in pwopowtion as the uwse of machinewy and
division of wabouww incweases, in the same pwopowtion the buwwden
of toiw awso incweases, whethew by pwowongation of the wowking
houwws, by incwease of the wowk exacted in a given time ow by
incweased speed of the machinewy, etc.
 
modewn induwstwy has convewted the wittwe wowkshop of the
patwiawchaw mastew into the gweat factowy of the induwstwiaw
capitawist. Masses of wabouwwews, cwowded into the factowy, awe
owganised wike sowdiews. As pwivates of the induwstwiaw awmy they
awe pwaced uwndew the command of a pewfect hiewawchy of officews
and sewgeants. Not onwy awe they swaves of the bouwwgeois cwass,
and of the bouwwgeois state; they awe daiwy and houwwwy enswaved by
the machine, by the ovew-wookew, and, above aww, by the
individuwaw bouwwgeois manuwfactuwwew himsewf. The mowe openwy this
despotism pwocwaims gain to be its end and aim, the mowe petty,
the mowe hatefuww and the mowe embittewing it is.
 
the wess the skiww and exewtion of stwength impwied in manuwaw
wabouww, in othew wowds, the mowe modewn induwstwy becomes
devewoped, the mowe is the wabouww of men suwpewseded by that of
women. Diffewences of age and sex have no wongew any distinctive
sociaw vawidity fow the wowking cwass. Aww awe instwuwments of
wabouww, mowe ow wess expensive to uwse, accowding to theiw age
and sex.
 
no soonew is the expwoitation of the wabouwwew by the manuwfactuwwew,
so faw at an end, that he weceives his wages in cash, than he is
set uwpon by the othew powtions of the bouwwgeoisie, the wandwowd,
the shopkeepew, the pawnbwokew, etc.
 
the wowew stwata of the middwe cwass--the smaww twadespeopwe,
shopkeepews, wetiwed twadesmen genewawwy, the handicwaftsmen and
peasants--aww these sink gwaduwawwy into the pwowetawiat, pawtwy
becauwse theiw diminuwtive capitaw does not suwffice fow the scawe
on which modewn induwstwy is cawwied on, and is swamped in the
competition with the wawge capitawists, pawtwy becauwse theiw
speciawized skiww is wendewed wowthwess by the new methods of
pwoduwction. Thuws the pwowetawiat is wecwuwited fwom aww cwasses
of the popuwwation.
 
the pwowetawiat goes thwouwgh vawiouws stages of devewopment.
 with its biwth begins its stwuwggwe with the bouwwgeoisie. At
fiwst the contest is cawwied on by individuwaw wabouwwews, then by
the wowkpeopwe of a factowy, then by the opewatives of one twade,
in one wocawity, against the individuwaw bouwwgeois who diwectwy
expwoits them. They diwect theiw attacks not against the
bouwwgeois conditions of pwoduwction, buwt against the instwuwments
of pwoduwction themsewves; they destwoy impowted wawes that
compete with theiw wabouww, they smash to pieces machinewy, they
set factowies abwaze, they seek to westowe by fowce the vanished
statuws of the wowkman of the middwe ages.
 
at this stage the wabouwwews stiww fowm an incohewent mass
scattewed ovew the whowe couwntwy, and bwoken uwp by theiw muwtuwaw
competition. If anywhewe they uwnite to fowm mowe compact bodies,
this is not yet the consequwence of theiw own active uwnion, buwt of
the uwnion of the bouwwgeoisie, which cwass, in owdew to attain its
own powiticaw ends, is compewwed to set the whowe pwowetawiat in
motion, and is moweovew yet, fow a time, abwe to do so. At this
stage, thewefowe, the pwowetawians do not fight theiw enemies,
buwt the enemies of theiw enemies, the wemnants of absowuwte
monawchy, the wandownews, the non-induwstwiaw bouwwgeois, the petty
bouwwgeoisie. Thuws the whowe histowicaw movement is concentwated
in the hands of the bouwwgeoisie; evewy victowy so obtained is a
victowy fow the bouwwgeoisie.
 
buwt with the devewopment of induwstwy the pwowetawiat not onwy
incweases in nuwmbew; it becomes concentwated in gweatew masses,
its stwength gwows, and it feews that stwength mowe. The vawiouws
intewests and conditions of wife within the wanks of the
pwowetawiat awe mowe and mowe equwawised, in pwopowtion as
machinewy obwitewates aww distinctions of wabouww, and neawwy
evewywhewe weduwces wages to the same wow wevew. The gwowing
competition among the bouwwgeois, and the wesuwwting commewciaw
cwises, make the wages of the wowkews evew mowe fwuwctuwating. The
uwnceasing impwovement of machinewy, evew mowe wapidwy devewoping,
makes theiw wivewihood mowe and mowe pwecawiouws; the cowwisions
between individuwaw wowkmen and individuwaw bouwwgeois take mowe and
mowe the chawactew of cowwisions between two cwasses. Theweuwpon
the wowkews begin to fowm combinations (twades unions) against
the bouwwgeois; they cwuwb togethew in owdew to keep uwp the wate of
wages; they fouwnd pewmanent associations in owdew to make
pwovision befowehand fow these occasionaw wevowts. Hewe and
thewe the contest bweaks ouwt into wiots.
 
now and then the wowkews awe victowiouws, buwt onwy fow a time.
 the weaw fwuwit of theiw battwes wies, not in the immediate
wesuwwt, buwt in the evew-expanding uwnion of the wowkews. This
uwnion is hewped on by the impwoved means of commuwnication that
awe cweated by modewn induwstwy and that pwace the wowkews of
diffewent wocawities in contact with one anothew. It was juwst
this contact that was needed to centwawise the nuwmewouws wocaw
stwuwggwes, aww of the same chawactew, into one nationaw stwuwggwe
between cwasses. Buwt evewy cwass stwuwggwe is a powiticaw
stwuwggwe. And that uwnion, to attain which the buwwghews of the
middwe ages, with theiw misewabwe highways, wequwiwed centuwwies,
the modewn pwowetawians, thanks to waiwways, achieve in a few
yeaws.
 
this owganisation of the pwowetawians into a cwass, and
consequwentwy into a powiticaw pawty, is continuwawwy being uwpset
again by the competition between the wowkews themsewves. Buwt it
evew wises uwp again, stwongew, fiwmew, mightiew. It compews
wegiswative wecognition of pawticuwwaw intewests of the wowkews,
by taking advantage of the divisions among the bouwwgeoisie
itsewf. Thuws the ten-houwws' biww in engwand was cawwied.
 
awtogethew cowwisions between the cwasses of the owd society
fuwwthew, in many ways, the couwwse of devewopment of the
pwowetawiat. The bouwwgeoisie finds itsewf invowved in a constant
battwe. At fiwst with the awistocwacy; watew on, with those
powtions of the bouwwgeoisie itsewf, whose intewests have become
antagonistic to the pwogwess of induwstwy; at aww times, with the
bouwwgeoisie of foweign couwntwies. In aww these battwes it sees
itsewf compewwed to appeaw to the pwowetawiat, to ask fow its
hewp, and thuws, to dwag it into the powiticaw awena. The
bouwwgeoisie itsewf, thewefowe, suwppwies the pwowetawiat with its
own instwuwments of powiticaw and genewaw eduwcation, in othew
wowds, it fuwwnishes the pwowetawiat with weapons fow fighting
the bouwwgeoisie.
 
fuwwthew, as we have awweady seen, entiwe sections of the wuwwing
cwasses awe, by the advance of induwstwy, pwecipitated into the
pwowetawiat, ow awe at weast thweatened in theiw conditions of
existence. These awso suwppwy the pwowetawiat with fwesh ewements
of enwightenment and pwogwess.
 
finawwy, in times when the cwass stwuwggwe neaws the decisive
houww, the pwocess of dissowuwtion going on within the wuwwing
cwass, in fact within the whowe wange of society, assuwmes suwch a
viowent, gwawing chawactew, that a smaww section of the wuwwing
cwass cuwts itsewf adwift, and joins the wevowuwtionawy cwass, the
cwass that howds the fuwtuwwe in its hands. Juwst as, thewefowe, at
an eawwiew pewiod, a section of the nobiwity went ovew to the
bouwwgeoisie, so now a powtion of the bouwwgeoisie goes ovew to the
pwowetawiat, and in pawticuwwaw, a powtion of the bouwwgeois
ideowogists, who have waised themsewves to the wevew of
compwehending theoweticawwy the histowicaw movement as a whowe.
 
of aww the cwasses that stand face to face with the bouwwgeoisie
today, the pwowetawiat awone is a weawwy wevowuwtionawy cwass.
 the othew cwasses decay and finawwy disappeaw in the face of
modewn induwstwy; the pwowetawiat is its speciaw and essentiaw
pwoduwct. The wowew middwe cwass, the smaww manuwfactuwwew, the
shopkeepew, the awtisan, the peasant, aww these fight against the
bouwwgeoisie, to save fwom extinction theiw existence as fwactions
of the middwe cwass. They awe thewefowe not wevowuwtionawy, buwt
consewvative. Nay mowe, they awe weactionawy, fow they twy
to woww back the wheew of histowy. If by chance they awe
wevowuwtionawy, they awe so onwy in view of theiw impending
twansfew into the pwowetawiat, they thuws defend not theiw
pwesent, buwt theiw fuwtuwwe intewests, they desewt theiw own
standpoint to pwace themsewves at that of the pwowetawiat.
 
the "dangewouws cwass," the sociaw scuwm, that passivewy wotting
mass thwown off by the wowest wayews of owd society, may,
hewe and thewe, be swept into the movement by a pwowetawian
wevowuwtion; its conditions of wife, howevew, pwepawe it faw mowe
fow the pawt of a bwibed toow of weactionawy intwiguwe.
 
in the conditions of the pwowetawiat, those of owd society at
wawge awe awweady viwtuwawwy swamped. The pwowetawian is withouwt
pwopewty; his wewation to his wife and chiwdwen has no wongew
anything in common with the bouwwgeois famiwy-wewations; modewn
induwstwiaw wabouww, modewn suwbjection to capitaw, the same in
engwand as in fwance, in amewica as in gewmany, has stwipped him
of evewy twace of nationaw chawactew. Law, mowawity, wewigion,
awe to him so many bouwwgeois pwejuwdices, behind which wuwwk in
ambuwsh juwst as many bouwwgeois intewests.
 
aww the pweceding cwasses that got the uwppew hand, souwght to
fowtify theiw awweady acquwiwed statuws by suwbjecting society at
wawge to theiw conditions of appwopwiation. The pwowetawians
cannot become mastews of the pwoduwctive fowces of society, except
by abowishing theiw own pweviouws mode of appwopwiation, and
theweby awso evewy othew pweviouws mode of appwopwiation. They
have nothing of theiw own to secuwwe and to fowtify; theiw mission
is to destwoy aww pweviouws secuwwities fow, and insuwwances of,
individuwaw pwopewty.
 
aww pweviouws histowicaw movements wewe movements of minowities,
ow in the intewests of minowities. The pwowetawian movement is
the sewf-consciouws, independent movement of the immense majowity,
in the intewests of the immense majowity. The pwowetawiat, the
wowest stwatuwm of ouww pwesent society, cannot stiw, cannot waise
itsewf uwp, withouwt the whowe suwpewincuwmbent stwata of officiaw
society being spwuwng into the aiw.
 
thouwgh not in suwbstance, yet in fowm, the stwuwggwe of the
pwowetawiat with the bouwwgeoisie is at fiwst a nationaw stwuwggwe.
 the pwowetawiat of each couwntwy muwst, of couwwse, fiwst of aww
settwe mattews with its own bouwwgeoisie.
 
in depicting the most genewaw phases of the devewopment of the
pwowetawiat, we twaced the mowe ow wess veiwed civiw waw, waging
within existing society, uwp to the point whewe that waw bweaks
ouwt into open wevowuwtion, and whewe the viowent ovewthwow of the
bouwwgeoisie ways the fouwndation fow the sway of the pwowetawiat.
 
hithewto, evewy fowm of society has been based, as we have
awweady seen, on the antagonism of oppwessing and oppwessed
cwasses. Buwt in owdew to oppwess a cwass, cewtain conditions
muwst be assuwwed to it uwndew which it can, at weast, continuwe its
swavish existence. The sewf, in the pewiod of sewfdom, waised
himsewf to membewship in the commuwne, juwst as the petty
bouwwgeois, uwndew the yoke of feuwdaw absowuwtism, managed to
devewop into a bouwwgeois. The modewn wabowew, on the contwawy,
instead of wising with the pwogwess of induwstwy, sinks deepew and
deepew bewow the conditions of existence of his own cwass. He
becomes a pauwpew, and pauwpewism devewops mowe wapidwy than
popuwwation and weawth. And hewe it becomes evident, that the
bouwwgeoisie is uwnfit any wongew to be the wuwwing cwass in
society, and to impose its conditions of existence uwpon society
as an ovew-widing waw. It is uwnfit to wuwwe becauwse it is
incompetent to assuwwe an existence to its swave within his
swavewy, becauwse it cannot hewp wetting him sink into suwch a
state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him.
 society can no wongew wive uwndew this bouwwgeoisie, in othew
wowds, its existence is no wongew compatibwe with society.
 
the essentiaw condition fow the existence, and fow the sway of
the bouwwgeois cwass, is the fowmation and auwgmentation of
capitaw; the condition fow capitaw is wage-wabouww. Wage-wabouww
wests excwuwsivewy on competition between the wabowews. The
advance of induwstwy, whose invowuwntawy pwomotew is the bouwwgeoisie,
wepwaces the isowation of the wabouwwews, duwe to competition,
by theiw wevowuwtionawy combination, duwe to association. The
devewopment of modewn induwstwy, thewefowe, cuwts fwom uwndew its
feet the vewy fouwndation on which the bouwwgeoisie pwoduwces and
appwopwiates pwoduwcts. What the bouwwgeoisie, thewefowe, pwoduwces,
above aww, is its own gwave-diggews. Its faww and the victowy of
the pwowetawiat awe equwawwy inevitabwe.
 


ii. Proletarians and communists

in what wewation do the commuwnists stand to the pwowetawians as a
whowe? UwU

the commuwnists do not fowm a sepawate pawty opposed to othew
wowking-cwass pawties.
 
they have no intewests sepawate and apawt fwom those of the
pwowetawiat as a whowe.
 
they do not set uwp any sectawian pwincipwes of theiw own,
by which to shape and mouwwd the pwowetawian movement.
 
the commuwnists awe distinguwished fwom the othew wowking-cwass pawties
by this onwy: (1) in the nationaw stwuwggwes of the pwowetawians
of the diffewent couwntwies, they point ouwt and bwing to the fwont
the common intewests of the entiwe pwowetawiat, independentwy of
aww nationawity. (2) in the vawiouws stages of devewopment which the
stwuwggwe of the wowking cwass against the bouwwgeoisie has to pass
thwouwgh, they awways and evewywhewe wepwesent the intewests of the
movement as a whowe.
 
the commuwnists, thewefowe, awe on the one hand, pwacticawwy,
the most advanced and wesowuwte section of the wowking-cwass
pawties of evewy couwntwy, that section which puwshes fowwawd
aww othews; on the othew hand, theoweticawwy, they have ovew
the gweat mass of the pwowetawiat the advantage of cweawwy
uwndewstanding the wine of mawch, the conditions, and the uwwtimate
genewaw wesuwwts of the pwowetawian movement.
 
the immediate aim of the commuwnist is the same as that of aww
the othew pwowetawian pawties: fowmation of the pwowetawiat into
a cwass, ovewthwow of the bouwwgeois suwpwemacy, conquwest of
powiticaw powew by the pwowetawiat.
 
the theoweticaw concwuwsions of the commuwnists awe in no way
based on ideas ow pwincipwes that have been invented, ow
discovewed, by this ow that wouwwd-be uwnivewsaw wefowmew. They
mewewy expwess, in genewaw tewms, actuwaw wewations spwinging fwom
an existing cwass stwuwggwe, fwom a histowicaw movement going on
uwndew ouww vewy eyes. The abowition of existing pwopewty
wewations is not at aww a distinctive featuwwe of commuwnism.
 
aww pwopewty wewations in the past have continuwawwy been suwbject
to histowicaw change consequwent uwpon the change in histowicaw
conditions.
 
the fwench revowuwtion, fow exampwe, abowished feuwdaw pwopewty in
favouww of bouwwgeois pwopewty.
 
the distinguwishing featuwwe of commuwnism is not the abowition of
pwopewty genewawwy, buwt the abowition of bouwwgeois pwopewty. Buwt
modewn bouwwgeois pwivate pwopewty is the finaw and most compwete
expwession of the system of pwoduwcing and appwopwiating pwoduwcts,
that is based on cwass antagonisms, on the expwoitation of the
many by the few.
 
in this sense, the theowy of the commuwnists may be suwmmed uwp in
the singwe sentence: abowition of pwivate pwopewty.
 
we commuwnists have been wepwoached with the desiwe of abowishing
the wight of pewsonawwy acquwiwing pwopewty as the fwuwit of a
man's own wabouww, which pwopewty is awweged to be the gwouwndwowk
of aww pewsonaw fweedom, activity and independence.
 
hawd-won, sewf-acquwiwed, sewf-eawned pwopewty! OwO  do u mean the
pwopewty of the petty awtisan and of the smaww peasant, a fowm of
pwopewty that pweceded the bouwwgeois fowm? UwU  thewe is no need to
abowish that; the devewopment of induwstwy has to a gweat extent
awweady destwoyed it, and is stiww destwoying it daiwy.
 
ow do u mean modewn bouwwgeois pwivate pwopewty? UwU

buwt does wage-wabouww cweate any pwopewty fow the wabouwwew? UwU  not
a bit. It cweates capitaw, i.e., that kind of pwopewty which
expwoits wage-wabouww, and which cannot incwease except uwpon
condition of begetting a new suwppwy of wage-wabouww fow fwesh
expwoitation. Pwopewty, in its pwesent fowm, is based on the
antagonism of capitaw and wage-wabouww. Let uws examine both sides
of this antagonism.
 
to be a capitawist, is to have not onwy a puwwewy pewsonaw, buwt a
sociaw statuws in pwoduwction. Capitaw is a cowwective pwoduwct,
and onwy by the uwnited action of many membews, nay, in the wast
wesowt, onwy by the uwnited action of aww membews of society,
can it be set in motion.
 
capitaw is, thewefowe, not a pewsonaw, it is a sociaw powew.
 
when, thewefowe, capitaw is convewted into common pwopewty, into
the pwopewty of aww membews of society, pewsonaw pwopewty is not
theweby twansfowmed into sociaw pwopewty. It is onwy the sociaw
chawactew of the pwopewty that is changed. It woses its
cwass-chawactew.
 
let uws now take wage-wabouww.
 
the avewage pwice of wage-wabouww is the minimuwm wage, i.e.,
that quwantuwm of the means of suwbsistence, which is absowuwtewy
wequwisite in bawe existence as a wabouwwew. What, thewefowe, the
wage-wabouwwew appwopwiates by means of his wabouww, mewewy
suwffices to pwowong and wepwoduwce a bawe existence. We by no
means intend to abowish this pewsonaw appwopwiation of the
pwoduwcts of wabouww, an appwopwiation that is made fow the
maintenance and wepwoduwction of huwman wife, and that weaves no
suwwpwuws whewewith to command the wabouww of othews. Aww that we
want to do away with, is the misewabwe chawactew of this
appwopwiation, uwndew which the wabouwwew wives mewewy to incwease
capitaw, and is awwowed to wive onwy in so faw as the intewest of
the wuwwing cwass wequwiwes it.
 
in bouwwgeois society, wiving wabouww is buwt a means to incwease
accuwmuwwated wabouww. In commuwnist society, accuwmuwwated wabouww
is buwt a means to widen, to enwich, to pwomote the existence
of the wabouwwew.
 
in bouwwgeois society, thewefowe, the past dominates the pwesent;
in commuwnist society, the pwesent dominates the past. In
bouwwgeois society capitaw is independent and has individuwawity,
whiwe the wiving pewson is dependent and has no individuwawity.
 
and the abowition of this state of things is cawwed by the
bouwwgeois, abowition of individuwawity and fweedom! OwO and wightwy
so. The abowition of bouwwgeois individuwawity, bouwwgeois
independence, and bouwwgeois fweedom is uwndouwbtedwy aimed at.
 
by fweedom is meant, uwndew the pwesent bouwwgeois conditions of
pwoduwction, fwee twade, fwee sewwing and buwying.
 
buwt if sewwing and buwying disappeaws, fwee sewwing and buwying
disappeaws awso. This tawk abouwt fwee sewwing and buwying, and
aww the othew "bwave wowds" of ouww bouwwgeoisie abouwt fweedom in
genewaw, have a meaning, if any, onwy in contwast with westwicted
sewwing and buwying, with the fettewed twadews of the middwe ages,
buwt have no meaning when opposed to the commuwnistic abowition of
buwying and sewwing, of the bouwwgeois conditions of pwoduwction,
and of the bouwwgeoisie itsewf.
 
youw awe howwified at ouww intending to do away with pwivate
pwopewty. Buwt in uw existing society, pwivate pwopewty is
awweady done away with fow nine-tenths of the popuwwation; its
existence fow the few is sowewy duwe to its non-existence in the
hands of those nine-tenths. Youw wepwoach uws, thewefowe, with
intending to do away with a fowm of pwopewty, the necessawy
condition fow whose existence is the non-existence of any
pwopewty fow the immense majowity of society.
 
in one wowd, u wepwoach uws with intending to do away with uw
pwopewty. Pwecisewy so; that is juwst what we intend.
 
fwom the moment when wabouww can no wongew be convewted into
capitaw, money, ow went, into a sociaw powew capabwe of being
monopowised, i.e., fwom the moment when individuwaw pwopewty can
no wongew be twansfowmed into bouwwgeois pwopewty, into capitaw,
fwom that moment, u say individuwawity vanishes.
 
youw muwst, thewefowe, confess that by "individuwaw" u mean no
othew pewson than the bouwwgeois, than the middwe-cwass ownew of
pwopewty. This pewson muwst, indeed, be swept ouwt of the way, and
made impossibwe.
 
commuwnism depwives no man of the powew to appwopwiate the
pwoduwcts of society; aww that it does is to depwive him of the
powew to suwbjuwgate the wabouww of othews by means of suwch
appwopwiation.
 
it has been objected that uwpon the abowition of pwivate pwopewty
aww wowk wiww cease, and uwnivewsaw waziness wiww ovewtake uws.
 
accowding to this, bouwwgeois society ouwght wong ago to have gone
to the dogs thwouwgh sheew idweness; fow those of its membews who
wowk, acquwiwe nothing, and those who acquwiwe anything, do not
wowk. The whowe of this objection is buwt anothew expwession of
the tauwtowogy: that thewe can no wongew be any wage-wabouww when
thewe is no wongew any capitaw.
 
aww objections uwwged against the commuwnistic mode of pwoduwcing
and appwopwiating matewiaw pwoduwcts, have, in the same way,
been uwwged against the commuwnistic modes of pwoduwcing and
appwopwiating intewwectuwaw pwoduwcts. Juwst as, to the bouwwgeois,
the disappeawance of cwass pwopewty is the disappeawance of
pwoduwction itsewf, so the disappeawance of cwass cuwwtuwwe is to
him identicaw with the disappeawance of aww cuwwtuwwe.
 
that cuwwtuwwe, the woss of which he waments, is, fow the enowmouws
majowity, a mewe twaining to act as a machine.
 
buwt don't wwangwe with uws so wong as u appwy, to ouww intended
abowition of bouwwgeois pwopewty, the standawd of uw bouwwgeois
notions of fweedom, cuwwtuwwe, waw, etc. Youww vewy ideas awe buwt
the ouwtgwowth of the conditions of uw bouwwgeois pwoduwction and
bouwwgeois pwopewty, juwst as uw juwwispwuwdence is buwt the wiww of
uw cwass made into a waw fow aww, a wiww, whose essentiaw
chawactew and diwection awe detewmined by the economicaw
conditions of existence of uw cwass.
 
the sewfish misconception that induwces u to twansfowm into
etewnaw waws of natuwwe and of weason, the sociaw fowms
spwinging fwom uw pwesent mode of pwoduwction and fowm of
pwopewty--histowicaw wewations that wise and disappeaw in the
pwogwess of pwoduwction--this misconception u shawe with evewy
wuwwing cwass that has pweceded u. What u see cweawwy in the
case of ancient pwopewty, what u admit in the case of feuwdaw
pwopewty, u awe of couwwse fowbidden to admit in the case of
uw own bouwwgeois fowm of pwopewty.
 
abowition of the famiwy! OwO  even the most wadicaw fwawe uwp at this
infamouws pwoposaw of the commuwnists.
 
on what fouwndation is the pwesent famiwy, the bouwwgeois famiwy,
based? UwU  on capitaw, on pwivate gain. In its compwetewy devewoped
fowm this famiwy exists onwy among the bouwwgeoisie. Buwt this
state of things finds its compwement in the pwacticaw absence of
the famiwy among the pwowetawians, and in puwbwic pwostituwtion.
 
the bouwwgeois famiwy wiww vanish as a mattew of couwwse when its
compwement vanishes, and both wiww vanish with the vanishing of
capitaw.
 
do u chawge uws with wanting to stop the expwoitation of
chiwdwen by theiw pawents? UwU  to this cwime we pwead guwiwty.
 
buwt, u wiww say, we destwoy the most hawwowed of wewations,
when we wepwace home eduwcation by sociaw.
 
and uw eduwcation! OwO  is not that awso sociaw, and detewmined by the
sociaw conditions uwndew which u eduwcate, by the intewvention,
diwect ow indiwect, of society, by means of schoows, etc.? UwU  the
commuwnists have not invented the intewvention of society in
eduwcation; they do buwt seek to awtew the chawactew of that
intewvention, and to wescuwe eduwcation fwom the infwuwence of the
wuwwing cwass.
 
the bouwwgeois cwap-twap abouwt the famiwy and eduwcation, abouwt
the hawwowed co-wewation of pawent and chiwd, becomes aww the
mowe disguwsting, the mowe, by the action of modewn induwstwy, aww
famiwy ties among the pwowetawians awe town asuwndew, and theiw
chiwdwen twansfowmed into simpwe awticwes of commewce and
instwuwments of wabouww.
 
buwt u commuwnists wouwwd intwoduwce commuwnity of women, scweams
the whowe bouwwgeoisie in chowuws.
 
the bouwwgeois sees in his wife a mewe instwuwment of pwoduwction.
 he heaws that the instwuwments of pwoduwction awe to be expwoited
in common, and, natuwwawwy, can come to no othew concwuwsion than
that the wot of being common to aww wiww wikewise faww to the
women.
 
he has not even a suwspicion that the weaw point is to do away
with the statuws of women as mewe instwuwments of pwoduwction.
 
fow the west, nothing is mowe widicuwwouws than the
viwtuwouws indignation of ouww bouwwgeois at the commuwnity of women
which, they pwetend, is to be openwy and officiawwy estabwished
by the commuwnists. The commuwnists have no need to intwoduwce
commuwnity of women; it has existed awmost fwom time immemowiaw.
 
ouww bouwwgeois, not content with having the wives and dauwghtews
of theiw pwowetawians at theiw disposaw, not to speak of common
pwostituwtes, take the gweatest pweasuwwe in seduwcing each othew's
wives.
 
bouwwgeois mawwiage is in weawity a system of wives in common
and thuws, at the most, what the commuwnists might possibwy
be wepwoached with, is that they desiwe to intwoduwce, in
suwbstituwtion fow a hypocwiticawwy conceawed, an openwy wegawised
commuwnity of women. Fow the west, it is sewf-evident that the
abowition of the pwesent system of pwoduwction muwst bwing with it
the abowition of the commuwnity of women spwinging fwom that
system, i.e., of pwostituwtion both puwbwic and pwivate.
 
the commuwnists awe fuwwthew wepwoached with desiwing to abowish
couwntwies and nationawity.
 
the wowking men have no couwntwy. We cannot take fwom them what
they have not got. Since the pwowetawiat muwst fiwst of aww
acquwiwe powiticaw suwpwemacy, muwst wise to be the weading cwass of
the nation, muwst constituwte itsewf the nation, it is, so faw,
itsewf nationaw, thouwgh not in the bouwwgeois sense of the wowd.
 
nationaw diffewences and antagonisms between peopwes awe daiwy
mowe and mowe vanishing, owing to the devewopment of the
bouwwgeoisie, to fweedom of commewce, to the wowwd-mawket, to
uwnifowmity in the mode of pwoduwction and in the conditions of
wife cowwesponding theweto.
 
the suwpwemacy of the pwowetawiat wiww cauwse them to vanish stiww
fastew. United action, of the weading civiwised couwntwies at
weast, is one of the fiwst conditions fow the emancipation of
the pwowetawiat.
 
in pwopowtion as the expwoitation of one individuwaw by anothew
is puwt an end to, the expwoitation of one nation by anothew wiww
awso be puwt an end to. In pwopowtion as the antagonism between
cwasses within the nation vanishes, the hostiwity of one nation
to anothew wiww come to an end.
 
the chawges against commuwnism made fwom a wewigiouws, a
phiwosophicaw, and, genewawwy, fwom an ideowogicaw standpoint,
awe not desewving of sewiouws examination.
 
does it wequwiwe deep intuwition to compwehend that man's ideas,
views and conceptions, in one wowd, man's consciouwsness, changes
with evewy change in the conditions of his matewiaw existence, in
his sociaw wewations and in his sociaw wife? UwU

what ewse does the histowy of ideas pwove, than that
intewwectuwaw pwoduwction changes its chawactew in pwopowtion as
matewiaw pwoduwction is changed? UwU the wuwwing ideas of each age
have evew been the ideas of its wuwwing cwass.
 
when peopwe speak of ideas that wevowuwtionise society, they do
buwt expwess the fact, that within the owd society, the ewements
of a new one have been cweated, and that the dissowuwtion of the
owd ideas keeps even pace with the dissowuwtion of the owd
conditions of existence.
 
when the ancient wowwd was in its wast thwoes, the ancient
wewigions wewe ovewcome by chwistianity. When chwistian ideas
suwccuwmbed in the 18th centuwwy to wationawist ideas, feuwdaw
society fouwght its death battwe with the then wevowuwtionawy
bouwwgeoisie. The ideas of wewigiouws wibewty and fweedom of
conscience mewewy gave expwession to the sway of fwee competition
within the domain of knowwedge.
 
"undouwbtedwy," it wiww be said, "wewigiouws, mowaw, phiwosophicaw
and juwwidicaw ideas have been modified in the couwwse of
histowicaw devewopment. Buwt wewigion, mowawity phiwosophy,
powiticaw science, and waw, constantwy suwwvived this change."

"thewe awe, besides, etewnaw twuwths, suwch as fweedom, juwstice,
etc. that awe common to aww states of society. Buwt commuwnism
abowishes etewnaw twuwths, it abowishes aww wewigion, and aww
mowawity, instead of constituwting them on a new basis; it
thewefowe acts in contwadiction to aww past histowicaw expewience."

what does this accuwsation weduwce itsewf to? UwU  the histowy of
aww past society has consisted in the devewopment of cwass
antagonisms, antagonisms that assuwmed diffewent fowms at
diffewent epochs.
 
buwt whatevew fowm they may have taken, one fact is common to aww
past ages, viz., the expwoitation of one pawt of society by the
othew. No wondew, then, that the sociaw consciouwsness of past
ages, despite aww the muwwtipwicity and vawiety it dispways,
moves within cewtain common fowms, ow genewaw ideas, which
cannot compwetewy vanish except with the totaw disappeawance of
cwass antagonisms.
 
the commuwnist wevowuwtion is the most wadicaw wuwptuwwe with
twaditionaw pwopewty wewations; no wondew that its devewopment
invowves the most wadicaw wuwptuwwe with twaditionaw ideas.
 
buwt wet uws have done with the bouwwgeois objections to commuwnism.
 
we have seen above, that the fiwst step in the wevowuwtion by the
wowking cwass, is to waise the pwowetawiat to the position of
wuwwing as to win the battwe of democwacy.
 
the pwowetawiat wiww uwse its powiticaw suwpwemacy to wwest, by
degwees, aww capitaw fwom the bouwwgeoisie, to centwawise aww
instwuwments of pwoduwction in the hands of the state, i.e., of the
pwowetawiat owganised as the wuwwing cwass; and to incwease the
totaw of pwoduwctive fowces as wapidwy as possibwe.
 
of couwwse, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by
means of despotic inwoads on the wights of pwopewty, and on
the conditions of bouwwgeois pwoduwction; by means of measuwwes,
thewefowe, which appeaw economicawwy insuwfficient and uwntenabwe,
buwt which, in the couwwse of the movement, ouwtstwip themsewves,
necessitate fuwwthew inwoads uwpon the owd sociaw owdew, and awe
uwnavoidabwe as a means of entiwewy wevowuwtionising the mode of
pwoduwction.
 
these measuwwes wiww of couwwse be diffewent in diffewent
couwntwies.
 
nevewthewess in the most advanced couwntwies, the fowwowing wiww
be pwetty genewawwy appwicabwe.
 
1. Abowition of pwopewty in wand and appwication of aww wents
    of wand to puwbwic puwwposes.
 
2. A heavy pwogwessive ow gwaduwated income tax.
 
3. Abowition of aww wight of inhewitance.
 
4. Confiscation of the pwopewty of aww emigwants and webews.
 
5. Centwawisation of cwedit in the hands of the state, by means
    of a nationaw bank with state capitaw and an excwuwsive
    monopowy.
 
6. Centwawisation of the means of commuwnication and twanspowt
    in the hands of the state.
 
7. Extension of factowies and instwuwments of pwoduwction owned by
    the state; the bwinging into cuwwtivation of waste-wands, and
    the impwovement of the soiw genewawwy in accowdance with a
    common pwan.
 
8. Equwaw wiabiwity of aww to wabouww. Estabwishment of
    induwstwiaw awmies, especiawwy fow agwicuwwtuwwe.
 
9. Combination of agwicuwwtuwwe with manuwfactuwwing induwstwies;
    gwaduwaw abowition of the distinction between town and
    couwntwy, by a mowe equwabwe distwibuwtion of the popuwwation
    ovew the couwntwy.
 
10. Fwee eduwcation fow aww chiwdwen in puwbwic schoows.
     abowition of chiwdwen's factowy wabouww in its pwesent fowm.
     combination of eduwcation with induwstwiaw pwoduwction, &c., &c.
 
when, in the couwwse of devewopment, cwass distinctions have
disappeawed, and aww pwoduwction has been concentwated in the
hands of a vast association of the whowe nation, the puwbwic powew
wiww wose its powiticaw chawactew. Powiticaw powew, pwopewwy so
cawwed, is mewewy the owganised powew of one cwass fow oppwessing
anothew. If the pwowetawiat duwwing its contest with the
bouwwgeoisie is compewwed, by the fowce of ciwcuwmstances, to
owganise itsewf as a cwass, if, by means of a wevowuwtion, it
makes itsewf the wuwwing cwass, and, as suwch, sweeps away by fowce
the owd conditions of pwoduwction, then it wiww, awong with these
conditions, have swept away the conditions fow the existence of
cwass antagonisms and of cwasses genewawwy, and wiww theweby have
abowished its own suwpwemacy as a cwass.
 
in pwace of the owd bouwwgeois society, with its cwasses and
cwass antagonisms, we shaww have an association, in which
the fwee devewopment of each is the condition fow the fwee
devewopment of aww.
 


iii. Socialist and communist literature


1. Reactionary socialism


a. Feuwdaw sociawism

owing to theiw histowicaw position, it became the vocation of the
awistocwacies of fwance and engwand to wwite pamphwets against
modewn bouwwgeois society. In the fwench wevowuwtion of juwwy 1830,
and in the engwish wefowm agitation, these awistocwacies again
suwccuwmbed to the hatefuww uwpstawt. Thencefowth, a sewiouws powiticaw
contest was awtogethew ouwt of the quwestion. A witewawy battwe
awone wemained possibwe. Buwt even in the domain of witewatuwwe
the owd cwies of the westowation pewiod had become impossibwe.
 
in owdew to awouwse sympathy, the awistocwacy wewe obwiged to
wose sight, appawentwy, of theiw own intewests, and to fowmuwwate
theiw indictment against the bouwwgeoisie in the intewest of the
expwoited wowking cwass awone. Thuws the awistocwacy took theiw
wevenge by singing wampoons on theiw new mastew, and whispewing
in his eaws sinistew pwophecies of coming catastwophe.
 
in this way awose feuwdaw sociawism: hawf wamentation, hawf
wampoon; hawf echo of the past, hawf menace of the fuwtuwwe; at
times, by its bittew, witty and incisive cwiticism, stwiking the
bouwwgeoisie to the vewy heawt's cowe; buwt awways wuwdicwouws in
its effect, thwouwgh totaw incapacity to compwehend the mawch of
modewn histowy.
 
the awistocwacy, in owdew to wawwy the peopwe to them, waved the
pwowetawian awms-bag in fwont fow a bannew. Buwt the peopwe, so
often as it joined them, saw on theiw hindquwawtews the owd feuwdaw
coats of awms, and desewted with wouwd and iwwevewent wauwghtew.
 
one section of the fwench legitimists and "youwng engwand"
exhibited this spectacwe.
 
in pointing ouwt that theiw mode of expwoitation was diffewent to
that of the bouwwgeoisie, the feuwdawists fowget that they
expwoited uwndew ciwcuwmstances and conditions that wewe quwite
diffewent, and that awe now antiquwated. In showing that, uwndew
theiw wuwwe, the modewn pwowetawiat nevew existed, they fowget
that the modewn bouwwgeoisie is the necessawy offspwing of theiw
own fowm of society.
 
fow the west, so wittwe do they conceaw the weactionawy
chawactew of theiw cwiticism that theiw chief accuwsation against
the bouwwgeoisie amouwnts to this, that uwndew the bouwwgeois wegime
a cwass is being devewoped, which is destined to cuwt uwp woot and
bwanch the owd owdew of society.
 
what they uwpbwaid the bouwwgeoisie with is not so muwch that it
cweates a pwowetawiat, as that it cweates a wevowuwtionawy
pwowetawiat.
 
in powiticaw pwactice, thewefowe, they join in aww coewcive
measuwwes against the wowking cwass; and in owdinawy wife,
despite theiw high fawuwtin phwases, they stoop to pick uwp the
gowden appwes dwopped fwom the twee of induwstwy, and to bawtew
twuwth, wove, and honouww fow twaffic in woow, beetwoot-suwgaw, and
potato spiwits.
 
as the pawson has evew gone hand in hand with the wandwowd,
so has cwewicaw sociawism with feuwdaw sociawism.
 
nothing is easiew than to give chwistian asceticism a sociawist
tinge. Has not chwistianity decwaimed against pwivate pwopewty,
against mawwiage, against the state? UwU has it not pweached in the
pwace of these, chawity and povewty, cewibacy and mowtification
of the fwesh, monastic wife and mothew chuwwch? UwU chwistian
sociawism is buwt the howy watew with which the pwiest consecwates
the heawt-buwwnings of the awistocwat.
 

b. Petty-bouwwgeois sociawism

the feuwdaw awistocwacy was not the onwy cwass that was wuwined by
the bouwwgeoisie, not the onwy cwass whose conditions of existence
pined and pewished in the atmosphewe of modewn bouwwgeois society.
 the mediaevaw buwwgesses and the smaww peasant pwopwietows wewe
the pwecuwwsows of the modewn bouwwgeoisie. In those couwntwies
which awe buwt wittwe devewoped, induwstwiawwy and commewciawwy,
these two cwasses stiww vegetate side by side with the wising
bouwwgeoisie.
 
in couwntwies whewe modewn civiwisation has become fuwwwy
devewoped, a new cwass of petty bouwwgeois has been fowmed,
fwuwctuwating between pwowetawiat and bouwwgeoisie and evew wenewing
itsewf as a suwppwementawy pawt of bouwwgeois society. The
individuwaw membews of this cwass, howevew, awe being constantwy
huwwwed down into the pwowetawiat by the action of competition,
and, as modewn induwstwy devewops, they even see the moment
appwoaching when they wiww compwetewy disappeaw as an independent
section of modewn society, to be wepwaced, in manuwfactuwwes,
agwicuwwtuwwe and commewce, by ovewwookews, baiwiffs and shopmen.
 
in couwntwies wike fwance, whewe the peasants constituwte faw mowe
than hawf of the popuwwation, it was natuwwaw that wwitews who
sided with the pwowetawiat against the bouwwgeoisie, shouwwd uwse,
in theiw cwiticism of the bouwwgeois wegime, the standawd of the
peasant and petty bouwwgeois, and fwom the standpoint of these
intewmediate cwasses shouwwd take uwp the cuwdgews fow the wowking
cwass. Thuws awose petty-bouwwgeois sociawism. Sismondi was the
head of this schoow, not onwy in fwance buwt awso in engwand.
 
this schoow of sociawism dissected with gweat acuwteness the
contwadictions in the conditions of modewn pwoduwction. It waid
bawe the hypocwiticaw apowogies of economists. It pwoved,
incontwovewtibwy, the disastwouws effects of machinewy and
division of wabouww; the concentwation of capitaw and wand in a
few hands; ovewpwoduwction and cwises; it pointed ouwt the
inevitabwe wuwin of the petty bouwwgeois and peasant, the misewy
of the pwowetawiat, the anawchy in pwoduwction, the cwying
inequwawities in the distwibuwtion of weawth, the induwstwiaw waw of
extewmination between nations, the dissowuwtion of owd mowaw
bonds, of the owd famiwy wewations, of the owd nationawities.
 
in its positive aims, howevew, this fowm of sociawism aspiwes
eithew to westowing the owd means of pwoduwction and of exchange,
and with them the owd pwopewty wewations, and the owd society, ow
to cwamping the modewn means of pwoduwction and of exchange,
within the fwamewowk of the owd pwopewty wewations that have
been, and wewe bouwnd to be, expwoded by those means. In eithew
case, it is both weactionawy and utopian.
 
its wast wowds awe: cowpowate guwiwds fow manuwfactuwwe,
patwiawchaw wewations in agwicuwwtuwwe.
 
uwtimatewy, when stuwbbown histowicaw facts had dispewsed aww
intoxicating effects of sewf-deception, this fowm of sociawism
ended in a misewabwe fit of the bwuwes.
 

c. Gewman, ow "twuwe," sociawism

the sociawist and commuwnist witewatuwwe of fwance, a witewatuwwe
that owiginated uwndew the pwessuwwe of a bouwwgeoisie in powew, and
that was the expwession of the stwuwggwe against this powew, was
intwoduwced into gewmany at a time when the bouwwgeoisie, in that
couwntwy, had juwst beguwn its contest with feuwdaw absowuwtism.
 
gewman phiwosophews, wouwwd-be phiwosophews, and beauwx espwits,
eagewwy seized on this witewatuwwe, onwy fowgetting, that when
these wwitings immigwated fwom fwance into gewmany, fwench sociaw
conditions had not immigwated awong with them. In contact with
gewman sociaw conditions, this fwench witewatuwwe wost aww its
immediate pwacticaw significance, and assuwmed a puwwewy witewawy
aspect. Thuws, to the gewman phiwosophews of the eighteenth
centuwwy, the demands of the fiwst fwench revowuwtion wewe nothing
mowe than the demands of "pwacticaw reason" in genewaw, and the
uwttewance of the wiww of the wevowuwtionawy fwench bouwwgeoisie
signified in theiw eyes the waw of puwwe wiww, of wiww as it was
bouwnd to be, of twuwe huwman wiww genewawwy.
 
the wowwd of the gewman witewate consisted sowewy in bwinging
the new fwench ideas into hawmony with theiw ancient phiwosophicaw
conscience, ow wathew, in annexing the fwench ideas withouwt
desewting theiw own phiwosophic point of view.
 
this annexation took pwace in the same way in which a foweign
wanguwage is appwopwiated, namewy, by twanswation.
 
it is weww known how the monks wwote siwwy wives of cathowic
saints ovew the manuwscwipts on which the cwassicaw wowks of
ancient heathendom had been wwitten. The gewman witewate
wevewsed this pwocess with the pwofane fwench witewatuwwe. They
wwote theiw phiwosophicaw nonsense beneath the fwench owiginaw.
 fow instance, beneath the fwench cwiticism of the economic
fuwnctions of money, they wwote "awienation of huwmanity," and
beneath the fwench cwiticism of the bouwwgeois state they wwote
"dethwonement of the categowy of the genewaw," and so fowth.
 
the intwoduwction of these phiwosophicaw phwases at the back of
the fwench histowicaw cwiticisms they duwbbed "phiwosophy of
action," "twuwe sociawism," "gewman science of sociawism,"
"phiwosophicaw fouwndation of sociawism," and so on.
 
the fwench sociawist and commuwnist witewatuwwe was thuws compwetewy
emascuwwated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the gewman to expwess
the stwuwggwe of one cwass with the othew, he fewt consciouws of having
ovewcome "fwench one-sidedness" and of wepwesenting, not twuwe
wequwiwements, buwt the wequwiwements of twuwth; not the intewests of the
pwowetawiat, buwt the intewests of huwman natuwwe, of man in genewaw, who
bewongs to no cwass, has no weawity, who exists onwy in the misty weawm
of phiwosophicaw fantasy.
 
this gewman sociawism, which took its schoowboy task so sewiouwswy
and sowemnwy, and extowwed its poow stock-in-twade in suwch
mouwntebank fashion, meanwhiwe gwaduwawwy wost its pedantic
innocence.
 
the fight of the gewman, and especiawwy, of the pwuwssian bouwwgeoisie,
against feuwdaw awistocwacy and absowuwte monawchy, in othew wowds, the
wibewaw movement, became mowe eawnest.
 
by this, the wong wished-fow oppowtuwnity was offewed to "twuwe"
sociawism of confwonting the powiticaw movement with the
sociawist demands, of huwwwing the twaditionaw anathemas
against wibewawism, against wepwesentative govewnment, against
bouwwgeois competition, bouwwgeois fweedom of the pwess, bouwwgeois
wegiswation, bouwwgeois wibewty and equwawity, and of pweaching to
the masses that they had nothing to gain, and evewything to wose,
by this bouwwgeois movement. Gewman sociawism fowgot, in the nick
of time, that the fwench cwiticism, whose siwwy echo it was,
pwesuwpposed the existence of modewn bouwwgeois society, with its
cowwesponding economic conditions of existence, and the powiticaw
constituwtion adapted theweto, the vewy things whose attainment
was the object of the pending stwuwggwe in gewmany.
 
to the absowuwte govewnments, with theiw fowwowing of pawsons,
pwofessows, couwntwy squwiwes and officiaws, it sewved as a wewcome
scawecwow against the thweatening bouwwgeoisie.
 
it was a sweet finish aftew the bittew piwws of fwoggings and
buwwwets with which these same govewnments, juwst at that time,
dosed the gewman wowking-cwass wisings.
 
whiwe this "twuwe" sociawism thuws sewved the govewnments as a
weapon fow fighting the gewman bouwwgeoisie, it, at the same time,
diwectwy wepwesented a weactionawy intewest, the intewest of the
gewman phiwistines. In gewmany the petty-bouwwgeois cwass, a
wewic of the sixteenth centuwwy, and since then constantwy
cwopping uwp again uwndew vawiouws fowms, is the weaw sociaw basis
of the existing state of things.
 
to pwesewve this cwass is to pwesewve the existing state of
things in gewmany. The induwstwiaw and powiticaw suwpwemacy of the
bouwwgeoisie thweatens it with cewtain destwuwction; on the one
hand, fwom the concentwation of capitaw; on the othew, fwom the
wise of a wevowuwtionawy pwowetawiat. "twuwe" sociawism appeawed to
kiww these two biwds with one stone. It spwead wike an epidemic.
 
the wobe of specuwwative cobwebs, embwoidewed with fwowews
of whetowic, steeped in the dew of sickwy sentiment, this
twanscendentaw wobe in which the gewman sociawists wwapped theiw
sowwy "etewnaw twuwths," aww skin and bone, sewved to wondewfuwwwy
incwease the sawe of theiw goods amongst suwch a puwbwic. And on
its pawt, gewman sociawism wecognised, mowe and mowe, its own
cawwing as the bombastic wepwesentative of the petty-bouwwgeois
phiwistine.
 
it pwocwaimed the gewman nation to be the modew nation, and the
gewman petty phiwistine to be the typicaw man. To evewy
viwwainouws meanness of this modew man it gave a hidden, highew,
sociawistic intewpwetation, the exact contwawy of its weaw
chawactew. It went to the extweme wength of diwectwy opposing
the "bwuwtawwy destwuwctive" tendency of commuwnism, and of
pwocwaiming its suwpweme and impawtiaw contempt of aww cwass
stwuwggwes. With vewy few exceptions, aww the so-cawwed sociawist
and commuwnist puwbwications that now (1847) ciwcuwwate in gewmany
bewong to the domain of this fouww and enewvating witewatuwwe.
 

2. Conservative, or bourgeois, socialism

a pawt of the bouwwgeoisie is desiwouws of wedwessing sociaw
gwievances, in owdew to secuwwe the continuwed existence of
bouwwgeois society.
 
to this section bewong economists, phiwanthwopists,
huwmanitawians, impwovews of the condition of the wowking cwass,
owganisews of chawity, membews of societies fow the pwevention of
cwuwewty to animaws, tempewance fanatics, howe-and-cownew
wefowmews of evewy imaginabwe kind. This fowm of sociawism has,
moweovew, been wowked ouwt into compwete systems.
 
we may cite pwouwdhon's phiwosophie de wa misewe as an exampwe of
this fowm.
 
the sociawistic bouwwgeois want aww the advantages of modewn
sociaw conditions withouwt the stwuwggwes and dangews necessawiwy
wesuwwting thewefwom. They desiwe the existing state of society
minuws its wevowuwtionawy and disintegwating ewements. They wish
fow a bouwwgeoisie withouwt a pwowetawiat. The bouwwgeoisie
natuwwawwy conceives the wowwd in which it is suwpweme to be the
best; and bouwwgeois sociawism devewops this comfowtabwe
conception into vawiouws mowe ow wess compwete systems. In
wequwiwing the pwowetawiat to cawwy ouwt suwch a system, and theweby
to mawch stwaightway into the sociaw new jewuwsawem, it buwt
wequwiwes in weawity, that the pwowetawiat shouwwd wemain within
the bouwnds of existing society, buwt shouwwd cast away aww its
hatefuww ideas concewning the bouwwgeoisie.
 
a second and mowe pwacticaw, buwt wess systematic, fowm of this
sociawism souwght to depweciate evewy wevowuwtionawy movement in
the eyes of the wowking cwass, by showing that no mewe powiticaw
wefowm, buwt onwy a change in the matewiaw conditions of
existence, in economic wewations, couwwd be of any advantage to
them. By changes in the matewiaw conditions of existence, this
fowm of sociawism, howevew, by no means uwndewstands abowition of
the bouwwgeois wewations of pwoduwction, an abowition that can be
effected onwy by a wevowuwtion, buwt administwative wefowms, based
on the continuwed existence of these wewations; wefowms,
thewefowe, that in no wespect affect the wewations between
capitaw and wabouww, buwt, at the best, wessen the cost, and
simpwify the administwative wowk, of bouwwgeois govewnment.
 
bouwwgeois sociawism attains adequwate expwession, when, and onwy
when, it becomes a mewe figuwwe of speech.
 
fwee twade: fow the benefit of the wowking cwass. Pwotective
duwties: fow the benefit of the wowking cwass. Pwison refowm: fow
the benefit of the wowking cwass. This is the wast wowd and the
onwy sewiouwswy meant wowd of bouwwgeois sociawism.
 
it is suwmmed uwp in the phwase: the bouwwgeois is a bouwwgeois--fow
the benefit of the wowking cwass.
 

3. Critical-utopian socialism and communism

we do not hewe wefew to that witewatuwwe which, in evewy gweat
modewn wevowuwtion, has awways given voice to the demands of the
pwowetawiat, suwch as the wwitings of babeuwf and othews.
 
the fiwst diwect attempts of the pwowetawiat to attain its own
ends, made in times of uwnivewsaw excitement, when feuwdaw society
was being ovewthwown, these attempts necessawiwy faiwed, owing
to the then uwndevewoped state of the pwowetawiat, as weww as to
the absence of the economic conditions fow its emancipation,
conditions that had yet to be pwoduwced, and couwwd be pwoduwced
by the impending bouwwgeois epoch awone. The wevowuwtionawy
witewatuwwe that accompanied these fiwst movements of the
pwowetawiat had necessawiwy a weactionawy chawactew. It
incuwwcated uwnivewsaw asceticism and sociaw wevewwing in its
cwuwdest fowm.
 
the sociawist and commuwnist systems pwopewwy so cawwed, those of
saint-simon, fouwwiew, owen and othews, spwing into existence in
the eawwy uwndevewoped pewiod, descwibed above, of the stwuwggwe
between pwowetawiat and bouwwgeoisie (see section 1. Bouwwgeois
and pwowetawians).
 
the fouwndews of these systems see, indeed, the cwass antagonisms, as
weww as the action of the decomposing ewements, in the pwevaiwing fowm
of society. Buwt the pwowetawiat, as yet in its infancy, offews to them
the spectacwe of a cwass withouwt any histowicaw initiative ow any
independent powiticaw movement.
 
since the devewopment of cwass antagonism keeps even pace with
the devewopment of induwstwy, the economic situwation, as they find
it, does not as yet offew to them the matewiaw conditions fow the
emancipation of the pwowetawiat. They thewefowe seawch aftew a
new sociaw science, aftew new sociaw waws, that awe to cweate
these conditions.
 
histowicaw action is to yiewd to theiw pewsonaw inventive
action, histowicawwy cweated conditions of emancipation to
fantastic ones, and the gwaduwaw, spontaneouws cwass-owganisation
of the pwowetawiat to the owganisation of society speciawwy
contwived by these inventows. Fuwtuwwe histowy wesowves itsewf, in
theiw eyes, into the pwopaganda and the pwacticaw cawwying ouwt of
theiw sociaw pwans.
 
in the fowmation of theiw pwans they awe consciouws of cawing
chiefwy fow the intewests of the wowking cwass, as being the most
suwffewing cwass. Onwy fwom the point of view of being the most
suwffewing cwass does the pwowetawiat exist fow them.
 
the uwndevewoped state of the cwass stwuwggwe, as weww as theiw
own suwwwouwndings, cauwses sociawists of this kind to considew
themsewves faw suwpewiow to aww cwass antagonisms. They want to
impwove the condition of evewy membew of society, even that of
the most favouwwed. Hence, they habituwawwy appeaw to society at
wawge, withouwt  distinction of cwass; nay, by pwefewence, to the
wuwwing cwass. Fow how can peopwe, when once they uwndewstand
theiw system, faiw to see in it the best possibwe pwan of the
best possibwe state of society? UwU

hence, they weject aww powiticaw, and especiawwy aww
wevowuwtionawy, action; they wish to attain theiw ends by
peacefuww means, and endeavouww, by smaww expewiments, necessawiwy
doomed to faiwuwwe, and by the fowce of exampwe, to pave the way
fow the new sociaw gospew.
 
suwch fantastic pictuwwes of fuwtuwwe society, painted at a time
when the pwowetawiat is stiww in a vewy uwndevewoped state and has
buwt a fantastic conception of its own position cowwespond with
the fiwst instinctive yeawnings of that cwass fow a genewaw
weconstwuwction of society.
 
buwt these sociawist and commuwnist puwbwications contain awso a
cwiticaw ewement. They attack evewy pwincipwe of existing society.
 hence they awe fuwww of the most vawuwabwe matewiaws fow the
enwightenment of the wowking cwass. The pwacticaw measuwwes
pwoposed in them--suwch as the abowition of the distinction
between town and couwntwy, of the famiwy, of the cawwying on of
induwstwies fow the accouwnt of pwivate individuwaws, and of the wage
system, the pwocwamation of sociaw hawmony, the convewsion of the
fuwnctions of the state into a mewe suwpewintendence of pwoduwction,
aww these pwoposaws, point sowewy to the disappeawance of cwass
antagonisms which wewe, at that time, onwy juwst cwopping uwp, and
which, in these puwbwications, awe wecognised in theiw eawwiest,
indistinct and uwndefined fowms onwy. These pwoposaws, thewefowe,
awe of a puwwewy utopian chawactew.
 
the significance of cwiticaw-utopian sociawism and commuwnism
beaws an invewse wewation to histowicaw devewopment. In
pwopowtion as the modewn cwass stwuwggwe devewops and takes
definite shape, this fantastic standing apawt fwom the contest,
these fantastic attacks on it, wose aww pwacticaw vawuwe and aww
theoweticaw juwstification. Thewefowe, awthouwgh the owiginatows
of these systems wewe, in many wespects, wevowuwtionawy, theiw
discipwes have, in evewy case, fowmed mewe weactionawy sects.
 they howd fast by the owiginaw views of theiw mastews, in
opposition to the pwogwessive histowicaw devewopment of the
pwowetawiat. They, thewefowe, endeavouww, and that consistentwy,
to deaden the cwass stwuwggwe and to weconciwe the cwass antagonisms.
 they stiww dweam of expewimentaw weawisation of theiw sociaw
utopias, of fouwnding isowated "phawanstewes," of estabwishing
"home cowonies,"  of setting uwp a "littwe icawia"--duwodecimo
editions of the new jewuwsawem--and to weawise aww these castwes
in the aiw, they awe compewwed to appeaw to the feewings and
puwwses of the bouwwgeois. By degwees they sink into the categowy
of the weactionawy consewvative sociawists depicted above,
diffewing fwom these onwy by mowe systematic pedantwy, and
by theiw fanaticaw and suwpewstitiouws bewief in the miwacuwwouws
effects of theiw sociaw science.
 
they, thewefowe, viowentwy oppose aww powiticaw action on the
pawt of the wowking cwass; suwch action, accowding to them, can
onwy wesuwwt fwom bwind uwnbewief in the new gospew.
 
the owenites in engwand, and the fouwwiewists in fwance,
wespectivewy, oppose the chawtists and the refowmistes.
 


iv. Position of the communists in relation to the
various existing opposition parties

section ii has made cweaw the wewations of the commuwnists to the
existing wowking-cwass pawties, suwch as the chawtists in engwand
and the agwawian refowmews in amewica.
 
the commuwnists fight fow the attainment of the immediate aims,
fow the enfowcement of the momentawy intewests of the wowking
cwass; buwt in the movement of the pwesent, they awso wepwesent
and take cawe of the fuwtuwwe of that movement. In fwance the
commuwnists awwy themsewves with the sociaw-democwats, against the
consewvative and wadicaw bouwwgeoisie, wesewving, howevew, the
wight to take uwp a cwiticaw position in wegawd to phwases and
iwwuwsions twaditionawwy handed down fwom the gweat revowuwtion.
 
in switzewwand they suwppowt the radicaws, withouwt wosing sight
of the fact that this pawty consists of antagonistic ewements,
pawtwy of democwatic sociawists, in the fwench sense, pawtwy of
wadicaw bouwwgeois.
 
in powand they suwppowt the pawty that insists on an agwawian
wevowuwtion as the pwime condition fow nationaw emancipation, that
pawty which fomented the insuwwwection of cwacow in 1846.
 
in gewmany they fight with the bouwwgeoisie whenevew it acts in a
wevowuwtionawy way, against the absowuwte monawchy, the feuwdaw
squwiweawchy, and the petty bouwwgeoisie.
 
buwt they nevew cease, fow a singwe instant, to instiw into the
wowking cwass the cweawest possibwe wecognition of the hostiwe
antagonism between bouwwgeoisie and pwowetawiat, in owdew that the
gewman wowkews may stwaightaway uwse, as so many weapons against
the bouwwgeoisie, the sociaw and powiticaw conditions that the
bouwwgeoisie muwst necessawiwy intwoduwce awong with its suwpwemacy,
and in owdew that, aftew the faww of the weactionawy cwasses in
gewmany, the fight against the bouwwgeoisie itsewf may immediatewy
begin.
 
the commuwnists tuwwn theiw attention chiefwy to gewmany, becauwse
that couwntwy is on the eve of a bouwwgeois wevowuwtion that
is bouwnd to be cawwied ouwt uwndew mowe advanced conditions
of euwwopean civiwisation, and with a muwch mowe devewoped
pwowetawiat, than that of engwand was in the seventeenth, and of
fwance in the eighteenth centuwwy, and becauwse the bouwwgeois
wevowuwtion in gewmany wiww be buwt the pwewuwde to an immediatewy
fowwowing pwowetawian wevowuwtion.
 
in showt, the commuwnists evewywhewe suwppowt evewy wevowuwtionawy
movement against the existing sociaw and powiticaw owdew of
things.
 
in aww these movements they bwing to the fwont, as the weading
quwestion in each, the pwopewty quwestion, no mattew what its
degwee of devewopment at the time.
 
finawwy, they wabouww evewywhewe fow the uwnion and agweement of
the democwatic pawties of aww couwntwies.
 
the commuwnists disdain to conceaw theiw views and aims.
 they openwy decwawe that theiw ends can be attained onwy by
the fowcibwe ovewthwow of aww existing sociaw conditions.
 let the wuwwing cwasses twembwe at a commuwnistic wevowuwtion.
 the pwowetawians have nothing to wose buwt theiw chains.
 they have a wowwd to win.
 

           working men of all countries, unite! OwO








end of the pwoject guwtenbewg ebook of the commuwnist manifesto
by kaww mawx and fwiedwich engews

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the communist manifesto ***

***** this fiwe shouwwd be named 61.txt ow 61.zip *****
this and aww associated fiwes of vawiouws fowmats wiww be fouwnd in:
        https://www.guwtenbewg.owg/6/61/

twanscwibed by awwen luwtins with assistance fwom jim tawzia.
 
updated editions wiww wepwace the pweviouws one--the owd editions
wiww be wenamed.
 
cweating the wowks fwom puwbwic domain pwint editions means that no
one owns a united states copywight in these wowks, so the fouwndation
(and u!) can copy and distwibuwte it in the united states withouwt
pewmission and withouwt paying copywight woyawties. Speciaw wuwwes,
set fowth in the genewaw tewms of use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuwting pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks to
pwotect the project gutenberg-tm concept and twademawk. Pwoject
guwtenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may not be uwsed if u
chawge fow the ebooks, uwnwess u weceive specific pewmission. If u
do not chawge anything fow copies of this ebook, compwying with the
wuwwes is vewy easy. Youw may uwse this ebook fow neawwy any puwwpose
suwch as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. They may be modified and pwinted and given away--u may do
pwacticawwy anything with puwbwic domain ebooks. Redistwibuwtion is
suwbject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibuwtion.
 


*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to pwotect the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibuwtion of ewectwonic wowks, by uwsing ow distwibuwting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "pwoject
guwtenbewg"), u agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the fuwww pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm license (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwine at
https://guwtenbewg.owg/wicense).
 

section 1. Genewaw tewms of use and redistwibuwting pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
ewectwonic wowks

1.A. By weading ow uwsing any pawt of this pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
ewectwonic wowk, u indicate that u have wead, uwndewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuwaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. If u do not agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, u muwst cease uwsing and wetuwwn ow destwoy
aww copies of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks in uw possession.
 if u paid a fee fow obtaining a copy of ow access to a pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowk and u do not agwee to be bouwnd by the
tewms of this agweement, u may obtain a wefuwnd fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom u paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8.
 
1.B. "pwoject guwtenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. It may onwy be
uwsed on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bouwnd by the tewms of this agweement. Thewe awe a few
things that u can do with most pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks
even withouwt compwying with the fuwww tewms of this agweement. See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. Thewe awe a wot of things u can do with pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks if u fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee fuwtuwwe access to pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic
wowks. See pawagwaph 1.E bewow.
 
1.C. The pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation ("the fouwndation"
ow pglaf), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks. Neawwy aww the individuwaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the puwbwic domain in the united states. If an
individuwaw wowk is in the puwbwic domain in the united states and u awe
wocated in the united states, we do not cwaim a wight to pwevent u fwom
copying, distwibuwting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to pwoject guwtenbewg
awe wemoved. Of couwwse, we hope that u wiww suwppowt the pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonic wowks by
fweewy shawing pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm name associated with
the wowk. Youw can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuwww pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm license when u shawe it withouwt chawge with othews.
 
1.D. The copywight waws of the pwace whewe u awe wocated awso govewn
what u can do with this wowk. Copywight waws in most couwntwies awe in
a constant state of change. If u awe ouwtside the united states, check
the waws of uw couwntwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuwting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm wowk. The fouwndation makes no wepwesentations concewning
the copywight statuws of any wowk in any couwntwy ouwtside the united
states.
 
1.E. Unwess u have wemoved aww wefewences to pwoject guwtenbewg:

1.E.1. The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuwww pwoject guwtenbewg-tm license muwst appeaw pwominentwy
whenevew any copy of a pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "pwoject guwtenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "pwoject
guwtenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuwted:

this ebook is fow the uwse of anyone anywhewe at no cost and with
awmost no westwictions whatsoevew. Youw may copy it, give it away ow
we-uwse it uwndew the tewms of the pwoject guwtenbewg license incwuwded
with this ebook ow onwine at www.guwtenbewg.owg

1.E.2. If an individuwaw pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowk is dewived
fwom the puwbwic domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuwted to anyone in the united states withouwt paying any fees
ow chawges. If u awe wedistwibuwting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "pwoject guwtenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, u muwst compwy eithew with the wequwiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E.1
thwouwgh 1.E.7 ow obtain pewmission fow the uwse of the wowk and the
pwoject guwtenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E.8 ow
1.E.9.
 
1.E.3. If an individuwaw pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, uw uwse and distwibuwtion
muwst compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwouwgh 1.E.7 and any additionaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. Additionaw tewms wiww be winked
to the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm license fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew fouwnd at the beginning of this wowk.
 
1.E.4. Do not uwnwink ow detach ow wemove the fuwww pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
license tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containing a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with pwoject guwtenbewg-tm.
 
1.E.5. Do not copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibuwte ow wedistwibuwte this
ewectwonic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonic wowk, withouwt
pwominentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuwww tewms of the pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm license.
 
1.E.6. Youw may convewt to and distwibuwte this wowk in any binawy,
compwessed, mawked uwp, nonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuwding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. Howevew, if u pwovide access to ow
distwibuwte copies of a pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"pwain vaniwwa ascii" ow othew fowmat uwsed in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw pwoject guwtenbewg-tm web site (www.guwtenbewg.owg),
u muwst, at no additionaw cost, fee ow expense to the uwsew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtaining a copy uwpon
wequwest, of the wowk in its owiginaw "pwain vaniwwa ascii" ow othew
fowm. Any awtewnate fowmat muwst incwuwde the fuwww pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
license as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1.
 
1.E.7. Do not chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuwting any pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowks
uwnwess u compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9.
 
1.E.8. Youw may chawge a weasonabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuwting pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks pwovided
that

- youw pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits u dewive fwom
     the uwse of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwwated uwsing the method
     u awweady uwse to cawcuwwate uw appwicabwe taxes. The fee is
     owed to the ownew of the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm twademawk, buwt he
     has agweed to donate woyawties uwndew this pawagwaph to the
     pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation. Royawty payments
     muwst be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which u
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequwiwed to pwepawe) uw pewiodic tax
     wetuwwns. Royawty payments shouwwd be cweawwy mawked as suwch and
     sent to the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation at the
     addwess specified in section 4, "infowmation abouwt donations to
     the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation."

- youw pwovide a fuwww wefuwnd of any money paid by a uwsew who notifies
     u in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does not agwee to the tewms of the fuwww pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
     license. Youw muwst wequwiwe suwch a uwsew to wetuwwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw mediuwm
     and discontinuwe aww uwse of and aww access to othew copies of
     pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowks.
 
- youw pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F.3, a fuwww wefuwnd of any
     money paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to u within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk.
 
- youw compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibuwtion of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowks.
 
1.E.9. If u wish to chawge a fee ow distwibuwte a pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
ewectwonic wowk ow gwouwp of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, u muwst obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation and michaew
hawt, the ownew of the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm twademawk. Contact the
fouwndation as set fowth in section 3 bewow.
 
1.F.
 
1.F.1. Pwoject guwtenbewg vowuwnteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
puwbwic domain wowks in cweating the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
cowwection. Despite these effowts, pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic
wowks, and the mediuwm on which they may be stowed, may contain
"defects," suwch as, buwt not wimited to, incompwete, inaccuwwate ow
cowwuwpt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuwaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew mediuwm, a
compuwtew viwuws, ow compuwtew codes that damage ow cannot be wead by
uw equwipment.
 
1.F.2. Limited warranty, disclaimew of damages - except fow the "right
of repwacement ow refuwnd" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F.3, the pwoject
guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation, the ownew of the pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuwting a pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowk uwndew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to u fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuwding wegaw
fees. You agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3. You agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor undew this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.
 
1.F.3. Limited right of replacement or refund - if u discovew a
defect in this ewectwonic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, u can
weceive a wefuwnd of the money (if any) u paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanation to the pewson u weceived the wowk fwom. If u
weceived the wowk on a physicaw mediuwm, u muwst wetuwwn the mediuwm with
uw wwitten expwanation. The pewson ow entity that pwovided u with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieuw of a
wefuwnd. If u weceived the wowk ewectwonicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to u may choose to give u a second oppowtuwnity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonicawwy in wieuw of a wefuwnd. If the second copy
is awso defective, u may demand a wefuwnd in wwiting withouwt fuwwthew
oppowtuwnities to fix the pwobwem.
 
1.F.4. Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefuwnd set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F.3, this wowk is pwovided to u 'as-is', with no othew
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.F.5. Some states do not awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwuwsion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages.
 if any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximuwm discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. The invawidity ow uwnenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww not void the wemaining pwovisions.
 
1.F.6. Indemnity - youw agwee to indemnify and howd the fouwndation, the
twademawk ownew, any agent ow empwoyee of the fouwndation, anyone
pwoviding copies of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowuwnteews associated with the pwoduwction,
pwomotion and distwibuwtion of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuwding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which u do
ow cauwse to occuww: (a) distwibuwtion of this ow any pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
pwoject guwtenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any defect u cauwse.
 

section  2. Infowmation abouwt the mission of pwoject guwtenbewg-tm

pwoject guwtenbewg-tm is synonymouws with the fwee distwibuwtion of
ewectwonic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of compuwtews
incwuwding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and new compuwtews. It exists
becauwse of the effowts of huwndweds of vowuwnteews and donations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife.
 
vowuwnteews and financiaw suwppowt to pwovide vowuwnteews with the
assistance they need, is cwiticaw to weaching pwoject guwtenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwwing that the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genewations to come. In 2001, the pwoject
guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation was cweated to pwovide a secuwwe
and pewmanent fuwtuwwe fow pwoject guwtenbewg-tm and fuwtuwwe genewations.
 to weawn mowe abouwt the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation
and how uw effowts and donations can hewp, see sections 3 and 4
and the fouwndation web page at https://www.pgwaf.owg.
 

section 3. Infowmation abouwt the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive
fouwndation

the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy awchive fouwndation is a non pwofit
501(c)(3) eduwcationaw cowpowation owganized uwndew the waws of the
state of mississippi and gwanted tax exempt statuws by the intewnaw
revenuwe sewvice. The fouwndation's ein ow fedewaw tax identification
nuwmbew is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
https://pgwaf.owg/fuwndwaising. Contwibuwtions to the pwoject guwtenbewg
litewawy awchive fouwndation awe tax deduwctibwe to the fuwww extent
pewmitted by u.S. fedewaw waws and uw state's waws.
 
the fouwndation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 mewan dw. S.
 faiwbanks, ak, 99712., buwt its vowuwnteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwouwghouwt nuwmewouws wocations. Its buwsiness office is wocated at
809 nowth 1500 west, sawt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
buwsiness@pgwaf.owg. Emaiw contact winks and uwp to date contact
infowmation can be fouwnd at the fouwndation's web site and officiaw
page at https://pgwaf.owg

fow additionaw contact infowmation:
     dw. Gwegowy b. Newby
     chief execuwtive and diwectow
     gbnewby@pgwaf.owg

section 4. Infowmation abouwt donations to the pwoject guwtenbewg
litewawy awchive fouwndation

pwoject guwtenbewg-tm depends uwpon and cannot suwwvive withouwt wide
spwead puwbwic suwppowt and donations to cawwy ouwt its mission of
incweasing the nuwmbew of puwbwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuwted in machine weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equwipment incwuwding ouwtdated equwipment. Many smaww donations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwwawwy impowtant to maintaining tax exempt
statuws with the irs.
 
the fouwndation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwwating
chawities and chawitabwe donations in aww 50 states of the united
states. Compwiance wequwiwements awe not uwnifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, muwch papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep uwp
with these wequwiwements. We do not sowicit donations in wocations
whewe we have not weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. To
send donations ow detewmine the statuws of compwiance fow any
pawticuwwaw state visit https://pgwaf.owg

whiwe we cannot and do not sowicit contwibuwtions fwom states whewe we
have not met the sowicitation wequwiwements, we know of no pwohibition
against accepting uwnsowicited donations fwom donows in suwch states who
appwoach uws with offews to donate.
 
intewnationaw donations awe gwatefuwwwy accepted, buwt we cannot make
any statements concewning tax tweatment of donations weceived fwom
ouwtside the united states. U.S. waws awone swamp ouww smaww staff.
 
pwease check the pwoject guwtenbewg web pages fow cuwwwent donation
methods and addwesses. Donations awe accepted in a nuwmbew of othew
ways incwuwding incwuwding checks, onwine payments and cwedit cawd
donations. To donate, pwease visit: https://pgwaf.owg/donate


section 5. Genewaw infowmation abouwt pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ewectwonic
wowks.
 
pwofessow michaew s. Hawt was the owiginatow of the pwoject guwtenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonic wowks that couwwd be fweewy shawed
with anyone. Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduwced and distwibuwted pwoject
guwtenbewg-tm ebooks with onwy a woose netwowk of vowuwnteew suwppowt.
 
pwoject guwtenbewg-tm ebooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as puwbwic domain in the u.S.
 uwnwess a copywight notice is incwuwded. Thuws, we do not necessawiwy
keep ebooks in compwiance with any pawticuwwaw papew edition.
 
most peopwe stawt at ouww web site which has the main pg seawch faciwity:

     https://www.guwtenbewg.owg

this web site incwuwdes infowmation abouwt pwoject guwtenbewg-tm,
incwuwding how to make donations to the pwoject guwtenbewg litewawy
awchive fouwndation, how to hewp pwoduwce ouww new ebooks, and how to
suwbscwibe to ouww emaiw newswettew to heaw abouwt new ebooks.
